---
chapter-number: 0
title: Introduction
link-citations: true
reference-section-title: References
---

The idea of creating artificial beings from non-living matter has long captured the imagination of artists, philosophers, and engineers alike. Golems in Jewish mythology were clay beings that were humanlike in form and function, but not quite human enough to speak or act of their own free will. In the Greek tragedy of Pygmalion, a sculptor's love for his statue is so profound that it enchants the statue to life. In 2001: A Space Odyssey, a mentally disturbed spaceship computer named HAL-9000 goes rogue and rebels against its mission, but it shows a disturbingly human-like fear when it is forcibly shut down. In HER, a complex and alluring operating system emotionally outgrows her human companion. 

Why is the idea of creating artificial people so universally fascinating across the ages? As remarked in the 2014 film Ex Machina: “If you've created a conscious machine, it's not the history of Man. That's the history of gods.” 

What a conceited thing to say! But conceit is a quintessential part of the human experience. We are endlessly obsessed with our own stories, our purpose in the universe, and our legacy after death. People have long wondered whether humans have something special in their minds that can't be replicated by Von Neumann computer architectures. A silicon computer that matches human intelligence would hold up a mirror to humanity. If it ends up being built from relatively simple principles, that invention might reveal that our own intelligences are nothing special after all. 

A machine mind might be freed from the mortal constraints of biological hardware. So long as its power source does not run out, it could conceivably witness the death of the Solar System, explore other galaxies, and carry on the memories of Humanity to the end of time. Like the Pyramids of Giza and religious texts that came before it, AI is just another form of cultural preservation.

The invention and continued refinement of computer technology in the 20th and 21st centuries has made these dreams tantalizingly plausible. A computer is simply a machine that processes information. Information processing is a fairly abstract term, encompassing both specialized tasks like adding numbers on a calculator, and general-purpose tasks like executing a user-written program. The PC in your home, the calculator you use for math class, and the tiny chip in your home’s smoke alarm are all computers that perform information-processing functions, with some much more specialized than others.

The beautiful thing about the mathematics of computation is that they are agnostic to what materials the computer is made of. A computer can be made up of tiny silicon transistors too small for the eye to see, or bulky vacuum tubes, or invisible microwaves in quantum superpositions. Certain substrates have advantages in terms of efficiency, but so long as two computers perform the same job, we can consider them equivalent in a functional sense. 

A computer can also be made of meat! A nervous system  -- brain, spine, and so on -- can be regarded as an information processing system that translates sensory information to the body’s behavior. Our distant ancestors evolved nervous systems to adapt to the world around us, so that they could survive and propagate genetic information to their offspring. The pursuit of survival leads to a wide variety of necessary information-processing sub-tasks: find nutrients in the wild, survive the elements, and avoid death.

Our meat-computers have taken on many more tasks in the ensuing eons: agriculture, warfare, and discovering physics. However, the basic adaptive self-regulation capabilities our nervous systems perform to keep us alive have remained conserved. As we will explore in this book, all intelligent behavior are merely specialized “subroutines” that fulfill our prime directive.

Given that the nervous system is a rather specialized computer and we know how to build general-purpose computers in silicon, it should in principle be physically possible to replicate a human mind in a silicon computer. This is known as “artificial generalized intelligence” (AGI): software that is every bit as alive, intelligent and emotionally capable as people are. Of course, the grand challenge is how we build such a computer. The history of AI has been a long string of discoveries whereby we discover that the reality we wish our software to interface with is full of more details than we thought, and the details themselves are crammed with even more detail still. 

Despite the daunting history of slow-ish progress towards General AI, my own life ambition is to create some AGIs of my own and this book is a speculative roadmap on how we might actually replicate crucial aspects of human intelligence in software: “humor”, “creativity”, “innate curiosity”, “cultural awareness”.

This book is a roadmap of how we might create AGI, based on the principle of "artificial survival". Despite the promising technologies that machine learning has brought us in the last decade, the path to achieving anything resembling AGI will be long, challenging and uncertain. I consider this a "Version 0" design document for AGI.  If I am successful, I expect to write an updated version in a few years revising the direction of the project.

<!-- Simultaneously, 10 years is also a very, very short period of time! It is about the length of an undergrad education (4 years) followed by a PhD program (6 years), back to back. Even futurists like Ray Kurzweil -- famous for predicting that AGI is always just around the corner -- wouldn’t dare to paint such short timelines.  -->

The reason I’m proposing a 10-year plan is simple: Parkinson's Law states that a project takes as long as its allocated time budget. Many AGI researchers hope to enjoy the fruits of AGI technology in their lifetime and play a part in creating it. A typical career is about 30 years long. Ambitious projects are often slowed down by unforeseen technical hurdles - unknown unknowns that cannot be planned for. So if I sketch out a 10 year plan, and everything goes well, I expect things to take somewhere closer to 30 years, just in time for my retirement. If I were to come up with a 30-year plan, then it would take 90 years to finish, and that’s no fun at all! I say “10 years” not out of Kurzweilian optimism, but rather as a guideline for focus and making my working years count.

The contents of this book will be highly speculative, but are informed by over 5 years of research experience at Google Brain, as well as my time studying computer science and neuroscience in my college days at Brown University. I hope to inspire the reader to follow this line of work and pursue what interesting questions we may encounter along the way.

The legacy of achieving this dream would be dramatic to say the least, almost certainly in ways that I lack the creativity to foresee today. But I am fairly certain that if done right, these entities could offer us companionship, glimpse new truths about the mind, assist every person in leading happy and productive lives, and force humanity to understand its own place and mortality in a vast, lonely universe.

# Overview

The central argument of this book is that re-creating human-level intelligence - a simulacrum of common sense, creative expression, and consciousness comparable to what humans have -- is not possible without first building animal intelligence. Animal intelligence is the primal sort of behaviors suited for eating, finding safety, and mating. We must first build a monkey brain before the human brain, the lizard brain before the monkey brain. If all the wonders of “human-level” intelligence are the tip of an iceberg, then primal intelligence required for evading death is the submerged bulk, largely hidden from view. I call this the "Mortal Coil Hypothesis": it is a 16th century English term for referring to the daily strife and tumults of living. As Schopenhauer conjectured, "Mortal Coil" may refer also to the idea of a wound thread of fate that unravels as we live our lives. I believe it is also an apt metaphor for the string that binds intelligence together: the tumults and troubles of daily life and strife are the very thing that give rise to life's ability to even contemplate it.

In order to understand why building Mortal Coils are so critical to building human-level intelligence and what tools we have at our disposal to create it, we need to contextualize the current state of AI. The first 8 chapters of the book comprise “Part I”, which is a clear-eyed view on what AI technology is today. It is a vast collection of research and socio-technical topics, and I will not be able to cover them all. Instead of surveying everything and jamming the book full of citations, I will hand-select a few topics I find interesting, and dive deeply into my own beliefs about them. You can think of Part I not as a comprehensive overview of AI, but rather a hand-picked selection of essays that will inspire thought about the challenges and opportunities for our AI systems.

We begin Chapter 1 with dispelling some common misconceptions the public often has about AI technology. AI is not a murderous Skynet, nor is it magical software with unbounded capability, nor is it the self-improving inevitable automation people think it is.

In chapter 2, we’ll touch on the many exciting new applications of Machine Learning, from superhuman game playing to translation to ad targeting systems that understand our preferences and political orientations. There have been several enormous breakthroughs in the last decade that have made this all possible. Ever-increasing computing power and data have supercharged old machine learning methods and ushered in a new era of promising applications and excitement. Techniques like neural networks are so ubiquitous that they make up the lingua franca of machine learning in nearly every discipline. 

The heady optimism of chapter 2 may make it seem as if we are on the cusp of revolutionizing the world with AI technology, but there remains much work to be done, for Deep Learning is a double-edged sword. We have made models more powerful by discarding human biases in models and letting the ML algorithm figure it out from data, but in doing so we lose the ability to comprehend computations that do not fall in line with our mental models. These limitations already make it difficult to deploy our powerful AI systems “in the wild” without a lot of additional safeguards. 

Whereas chapter 3 focuses on limitations of Deep Learning for deploying narrow AI, chapter 4 discussions the current limitations of our technology for creating general AI. The AI demonstrations you see in the media may seem marvelous or even superhuman, but they are still a far cry from the wondrous complexity and versatility and agency of an actual human being. Some of these challenges are purely technical. Much of the progress in narrow AI has only been possible when we define clear objectives and well-scoped testing scenarios. We lack these crutches in the AGI setting, so generalization needs to be pushed substantially. Other problems are sociological, stemming from academia and industry both failing to invest long-term into the development of AGI systems.

Semantics is describing what we mean into a clear, unambiguous set of code or language. In chapter 5, I discuss how semantic precision in specifying what we want our AI systems to do remains one of the profound technical challenges of building AI systems. Our concepts of reality and how intelligence handles it are fuzzy and vaguely defined, but code must be precisely defined. Machine Learning gives us some tools to deal with the ambiguity, but as we begin to consider how to weave AI systems together into a single unified fabric, we run into the same challenging problem of defining objectives and meaning. 

Fortunately, not all hope is lost. For all the ink spilled on how AGI always seems to be out of reach, and all the philosophical hand-wringing about what intelligence should and should not be, biological evolution has still managed to produce numerous intelligent creatures that no present software system can match in generality. As much of my proposed AGI roadmap draws inspiration from neuroethology and animal behaviors, chapter 6 is a primer on the "Neurobiological (software) stack". The 

<!-- a brief overview of the wonders of neuroscience, biology, and ecology, and the many creative and elegant ways in which life itself solved the thorny problems of semantics and multi-task integration with a simple, unifying constraint: survival. Intelligence does not exist on its own; a nervous system’s design only becomes meaningful in the context of its ecological environment. -->

The idea that intelligence should be defined and optimized for some ecological niche is hardly new. Artificial Life is an old sub-field of AI that dates nearly as far back as computing itself, with computer scientists in the 20th century building computational models of predator-prey relationships, swarming flocks of birds, and procedurally generated vegetation attempting to mimic life. Artificial Life possesses an elegant simplicity, where we start with a dumb creature and hope that a complex, hostile world leads to adaptive behavior and intelligence. The idea is simple, but not easy to execute on - scaling up this idea to the level of human intelligence will be fraught with tradeoffs between computational tractability and fidelity to nature as it is.
 
To re-create life in silico, we must address the elephant in the room: what is life, anyway? In chapter 7, we’ll discuss how life goes beyond definitions of cells and genetic information. At the most fundamental level, life is information that consumes energy to preserve itself. We must consider intelligent behavior not only of the mind, but also the body, the species, the genetic code shared between species, and the molecular arrangements that persist across the eons. At every level of biological organization, cooperation and competition among physical information interact to produce rich complexity and diversity.

Chapter 7 presents the conceptual framework of how to think about evolution and survival in the most general of terms. But we still have to type something into a computer. How can we replicate such a long-running system with the computers of today? In chapter 8, I will discuss prior research on Artificial Life and what we’ve learned from them. I believe that even new technologies like Deep Reinforcement Learning are not sufficient to get us to the finish line - we will also require fundamental paradigm shifts in how we create Artificial Life.

PART II: Artificial Survival Intelligence

To emphasize the focus on intelligence as a means to survival, and nothing more, I use the term “Artificial Survival Intelligence”, or ASI, when referring to this roadmap. In Part II, I outline an ambitious 10-year plan to create ASI. This is formulated as a series of projects that provide building blocks and valuable data for ASI that not only survive in their own simulated world, but also in our real one. Survival is the only task, and rather than designing an intelligent system, we will craft ecological niches that demand the development of increasingly intelligent behavior and let evolution run its course. 

The first order of business, described in chapter 9, is to create a physically realistic MMO game where players control direct the selection of various animals. The game has no primary objective - the simulation just runs and runs and people oversee the creation of new critters in ways that they find interesting. Adding humans in the loop solves a key problem: it frees us from the need to program tricky objectives like “the meaning of life”, and simultaneously it provides rich data about how human-level intelligence (actual gamers) explore massive solution spaces. This system will be extended to study all the questions presented in the later chapters. I call this system the “Never Ending Game of Survival”.

In Chapter 10, we make Jungle Basketball much more “life-like” and permit never-ending evolution by introducing sexual reproduction. As we all know, sex makes life and fiction much more interesting. An interesting world where agents are driven to pursue sexual reproduction is an evolutionary spark that leads to capabilities like cooperation, competition, and the formation of new social structures.  

In chapter 10, we discuss the ecological niches that might lead to agents learning how to use tools and conduct warfare - again, another spark that kick-starts a qualitative jump in capability.  


In Chapter 11, we discuss domestication and 




In Chapter 12, we attempt to move beyond animal-level ASI and towards human-level intelligence. The ability to flexibly conceptualize that which cannot be immediately sensed is a necessary prerequisite for tool use. When these concepts can then become transmitted to others, this becomes a substrate for shared thought and language.

Chapter 13 - Once agents are capable of discussing shared concepts, this opens up a rich world beyond what they are presently experiencing. These worlds can be historical or hypothetical, regrets or fantasies. Cultural memory and stories serve to teach a social animals how to function, just as hippocampal memory teaches a squirrel where it buried its nuts. To encourage the formation of cultural memory and the persistence of information across generations, we must simulate seasonal phenomena like pestilence, famine, war, bounty, the rise and fall of societies must act as selective pressure to encourage cultural development. We want to encourage systems to develop a deep-seated curiosity for why things are the way they are.

Chapter 14-  the true test of a useful AI is to understand our Earth universe, not their simulated one (no matter how deceivingly realistic it may seem). Once agents are imbued with child-like curiosity and a means to form belief about how the world works, we give the simulated critters a glimpse of our world through portholes that bridge our reality and theirs. They have the means to prod and discover what opportunities and challenges exist in ours, as we have the means to prod theirs. At this point, the systems begin to be commercially interesting and will be able to solve our problems.

Our base survival routines, coupled with our ability to conceptualize the vast world around us, have coincidentally imbued us with a fondness for symmetry, peaceful society, symbols of a healthy culture, and awe. I will discuss in Chapter 15 how to channel that into the creation of beauty and art. More precisely, we will have to go beyond just creating art in an automated fashion, and create people with rich, inspired lives - Van Gohs and Monets that go on to create art of their own.

In Chapter 16, we consider how to get these AIs to improve the ASI system itself. This is akin to humans discovering genetic therapy, developing new medicines, building medical understanding of themselves in order to cure themselves of diseases and live smarter, healthier, more productive lives. What if we could get ASI to assist us with the development of the system?

Part III: ASI and Humanity

While Part II focuses on the technical roadmap for creating ASI, Part III focuses on the implications of ASI for its human creators - the ethical and social challenges that we might face if such technology were to exist. 

I wholly believe that life is stranger than fiction. Philosophy and science fiction have speculated much about impending AI-powered utopias and dystopias, but I believe that as we start to venture towards actual technological possibility, the specifics of how we do it will raise far more ethical issues that no one could have foresaw. The next few chapters will entertain a few of these possibilities, but by no means an exhaustive treatment. 

Focusing on the positives speculation first, we consider how ASI technology might benefit humanity in chapter 17. As the ASI lifeforms grow in complexity approaching mammalian and human-level intelligence, we can use them to study a wide variety of ecological and medical questions that are difficult or unethical to probe in live animal models. What are methods to combat overfishing? Obesity? What can we learn from the history of warfare to build more peaceful societies? What are the effects of legalizing drugs in a social society? Even if I am only able to succeed at 20% of the goals I set out in this book, I believe the spinoff technologies built in service of ASI will be valuable contributions to science and engineering in their own right.

In chapter 18, we discuss the socioeconomic implications of ASI. Any progress in technology has always been accompanied by the existential dread of humans made obsolete. Even though a completely autonomous ASI has yet to be created, we already have a decent model for how to think about co-existing with ASI - we need look no farther than our relationship to the average private corporation. 

In chapter 19, we discuss how ASI will enable humanity to ascend to a sort of Godhood. ASI will redefine our understanding of religion and philosophy. Complete control over the computational embodiment of mind and matter means that we can change the laws of reality and see how agents respond. Is this ethical? What is the degree of “interference” human “Gods” are allowed to impose upon their virtual universe? Do we have an obligation to be kind and merciful towards our charges, to respect the dignity of life?

The book ends with chapter 20: my personal story on how I became fascinated with technology and AGI research. I discuss some fictional examples of AI that really inspire me. This book is a “career plan” for myself, and I hope that this inspires many aspiring researchers from diverse walks of life to contemplate this path for themselves. 

This “napkin sketch” of ASI should be accessible to any general audience interested in AI, neuroscience, biology, physics, and philosophy. I hope that the book serves to inspire newcomers and educate the broader public - that is the best way to deal with fears and uncertainty of powerful technology . More technical parts of this book should be of interest to my colleagues in the research community, where I go in depth into technical details and suggest a long slew of exciting research projects.
